China and Russia now share healthy and mature relations, thanks to their joint 
efforts. The last century witnessed a number of far-reaching events in the world, 
including the victory of the October Revolution, establishment of the Soviet Union, 
the birth and growth of the new China, and the strengthening of China-Russia ties. 
The two countries have maintained diplomatic relations for 70 years now. My 
personal experience in the past 70 years includes being a member, at the age of 11, 
of the China-Soviet Friendship Association and now, at 78, the Chinese chairman of 
the China-Russia Friendship, Peace and Development Committee, which has given 
me some valuable lessons. 
First, we should be friends forever and never be enemies, because we are both 
powerful countries and neighbors. Lasting good relations will bring about sustainable 
development, stability and prosperity of our two countries, as well as of the world. 
Second, the two countries should respect each other and treat each other as 
equals. This is essential for a sustained, healthy and stable development of bilateral 
relations. 
Third, political trust between the two countries is important. This requires both 
sides to continue mutual dialogue and communication in order to avoid anything 
that may be detrimental to mutual trust. Our political trust has withstood the test of 
time. Yet we cannot rest on past laurels because we both face different challenges, 
including internal and external ones. 
As long as mutual political trust remains strong, nothing can come in the way of 
our relations. The "honeymoon period" in the China-Russia relations during the 
1950s is clear proof of this. 
Since the late 1980s, cooperation in the fields of trade, science and technology 
has been upgraded in terms of their level and scale. 
The advantages of both sides have been constantly integrated. In the future, we 
should upgrade cooperation in trade, science and technology to realize a higher level 
of integrated economic development in the face of fierce international competition. 
To this end, both sides should ensure their political relations move forward in a 
healthy manner. 
We should understand that a lot of people support the kind of relations we both 
share, while there are some who do not. I would like to remind that the China-Russia 
friendship isn't built on paper, and not even with brick, but with our heart-felt desire. 
There is a lot of instability and uncertainty in the world. Even as China and 
Russia witness a complicated international situation, the world is changing for the 
better. 
When it is time to celebrate the 100th anniversary of the establishment of our 
diplomatic relations, our two countries' national strength, our relations and 
influences in international affairs will be even more impressive than they are today. 
The choice before China and Russia is to move toward a future that is bright not 
only for the two countries but also for mankind. Our think tanks should come up with 
fresh ideas for greater contributions to the development of China-Russia relations. 
 
 
This year marks the 70th anniversary of the establishment of Moscow-Beijing 
diplomatic ties. Over the years, especially in the past 30 years, the two sides have 
learned to not allow ideological differences to affect their relations and instead build 
a bilateral partnership-as opposed to an alliance-based on equality, mutual trust, 
win-win cooperation, and to maintain cooperation without interfering in each other's 
internal affairs. 
At a time when people are seeking peace, development, and win-win 
cooperation, China and Russia, thanks to their mutually beneficial partnership, will 
play an increasingly important role in international relations and help to resolve 
global issues. There is enough reason to believe that Sino-Russian cooperation in 
fields such as the economy, technology, culture, military and diplomacy will deepen, 
and sound coordination will be established between the Chinaproposed Belt and 
Road Initiative and the Russia-proposed Eurasian Economic Union. 
That the Belt and Road Initiative is inclusive in nature will help it to align with 
the EEU, which is also aimed at promoting inclusive development. 
The Belt and Road Initiative's focus is on improving cross-border infrastructure 
connectivity to promote trade and investment, and technological cooperation, so as 
to strengthen regional development and stability. By aligning the EEU with the Belt 
and Road Initiative and cooperating with the Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank, 
Russia can overcome many of the difficulties it faces because of the sanctions 
imposed on it by Western powers. 
In fact, by using the Belt and Road Initiative and the EEU to deepen cooperation 
with more countries, China and Russia can generate more economic benefits. 
The Belt and Road Initiative has already become a new driver of economic 
growth for Eurasian countries. The initiative is also set to drive forward Sino-Russian 
energy cooperation, which has already advanced from traditional trade in energy to 
joint investment in the energy sector. For example, in the $26.9 billion liquefied 
natural gas (LNG) project on the Yamal Peninsula in the Arctic Circle, PetroChina 
holds a 20 percent stake and the Silk Road Fund a 9.9 percent stake. The Yamal 
project shipped LNG to China through the Arctic passage for the first time in July last 
year, and its third production line was put into service in December, one year ahead 
of schedule. 
Besides, Russia's Vankor is also a major oil supplier to northeastern China. In 
2018, China accounted for more than 84 percent of Russia's overall oil export to Asia, 
an increase of 24.1 percentage points. 
On Nov 29, 2018, nearly 90 representatives from energy, finance and 
information companies attended the China-Russia energy business forum to review 
the investment environment, discuss the prospects of deepening technological 
development and strengthening cooperation in the fields of oil, gas, electricity, coal, 
new energy and energy equipment. 
China and Russia established a strategic partnership in 1996 based on equality 
and mutual trust. China has also finalized such partnerships with more than 80 
countries. And by creating trouble for global free trade and resorting to trade 
protectionism, the United States is unwittingly strengthening the Sino-Russian 
strategic partnership. 
US historian Immanuel Wallerstein, based on historical trends, has said that the 
Netherlands was the world's leading power in the 17th century, Great Britain in the 
19th century and the US in the 20th century. Many believe this trend suggests China 
will be a world-class power in the 21st century. Perhaps perturbed by this conclusion, 
the US has been trying to drive a wedge between Beijing and Moscow and to check 
China's peaceful rise. 
However, China and Russia remain committed to strengthening mutual trust, 
deepening cooperation and boosting coordination between the Belt and Road 
Initiative and the EEU apart from working closely to promote regional peace, security 
and development through organizations such as the Shanghai Cooperation 
Organization.